Project Name: PublicHealthDS_Diabetes

I conducted an analysis to determine which demographic groups are the most burdened by healthcare access and expenditure using the CDC’s BRFSS data to create a model that can predict such groups.
There are millions of Americans who cannot afford to receive proper healthcare, and such a significant number of people who are unable to get the help they need to stay healthy. Some of these demographics are disproportionately exposed to such challenges, negatively affecting their health outcomes and creating social disparities. Therefore, it is essential to determine which demographic groups are the most burdened by healthcare access and expenditures to understand the problem and reduce the disparities by redirecting health care resources.

For this analysis, I used the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for the years 2011-2024, where ‘Health Care Access/Coverage’ class is included. I applied some data cleaning procedures since some rows did not have the Data_value and sample sizes below 50 for the relevant question were marked as unreliable, so I removed them from the analysis. After data cleaning, I obtained 4,561 rows. One interesting observation I made while conducting EDA was that many rows were marked as unreliable by the CDC.

In this analysis, I aimed to predict whether a group will be highly burdened or not on a scale where the median is considered a low level of burden. Thus, I used the cleaned data set and converted relevant columns containing Break_Out, Break_Out_Category, Locationabbr, and Year into numbers using one-hot encoding. To evaluate which model performs best for the task, I compared the baseline, Logistic Regression, k-Neighbors, Decision Tree, and Random Forest models. I evaluated the models using the ‘recall’ metric, focusing on the prediction of the ‘high-burden’ class since incorrectly predicting a group with a high burden as a low one is a worse scenario than the opposite.

The best model for the task was Logistic Regression, with a recall of 0.8170 for the ‘high-burden’ class, which means that it predicted more than 80% of high-burden groups accurately. More details about this model are captured in the accuracy/recall table below (created in cell ehp2PqX_mn-h). The plot below demonstrates how well the model predicted the classes.

I also conducted a fairness check for the best model, Logistic Regression, by observing the recall for each category of Break_Out_Category. Even though the overall recall for the ‘high-burden’ class is fairly high, there are subgroups for which the model performs significantly worse, as seen in the table below. For example, the recall for Education Attainment is significantly lower than for Income or Race/Ethnicity. This could mean that the model is less capable of capturing the burden for groups of people defined according to education, which might lead to fewer resources being redirected to such groups, exacerbating the disparities. Therefore, if this model were to be used for the task, it would be a good idea to implement some under-sampling for the ‘Education Attainment’ category or find a way to increase its recall, perhaps, by engineering more relevant features. One could also consider implementing a fairness-aware algorithm for the task.

One limitation of this analysis is that the data only contains aggregate statistics about the population, so the conclusions regard group-level interventions rather than individual ones. In addition, the choice of Data_Value as the target variable was somewhat arbitrary since it only represents percentages of affirmative answers to corresponding questions. There was no opportunity to assess how the value was determined exactly. One thing I would have done differently, given more time, is to look more closely into feature engineering. For example, I could try creating interaction terms from the Break_Out_Category and see if it makes sense to engineer new features based on the Break_Out. Another thing I would do differently is to try to find ways to make the model more fair, perhaps by looking more closely at the features that make certain groups more ‘predictable’.

The colab file is self-contained aside from initially downloading the data from the provided link. It also takes about 1-2 minutes to execute start to end in a colab session. Here is the link to my colab notebook (will provide upon submission).

I have completed an end-to-end data analysis, including assessing and cleaning the data, plotting visuals, telling a story, defining the problem, creating baseline and ML models, comparing them, and conducting a fairness check.
